.. include:: ../links.rst

##########################################################
NODDI Foundational Papers
##########################################################

- Multi-Compartment Modeling: NODDI is a three-compartment diffusion MRI model that separates intra-neurite, extra-neurite, and CSF water signals. This yields more specific microstructural indices than DTI – notably the intracellular volume fraction (ICVF) as a proxy for neurite density, and the orientation dispersion index (ODI) for neurite orientation variability :cite:p:`Zhang2012NODDI`. These metrics disentangle factors contributing to diffusion anisotropy that were conflated in tensor measures like FA :cite:p:`Zhang2012NODDI`.
- Clinical Feasibility: The original NODDI protocol used two diffusion shells (e.g. b≈700 and 2000 s/mm²) with moderate scan time (~30 min) to map neurite density and dispersion over the whole brain :cite:p:`Zhang2012NODDI`. It demonstrated that neurite density requires multi-shell data for accuracy, but orientation dispersion can be estimated with even a single-shell HARDI acquisition :cite:p:`Zhang2012NODDI`. This balance of biophysical detail and practicality spurred widespread adoption in research and clinical studies.
- Early Extensions: Researchers quickly built on NODDI’s framework. For example, Bingham-NODDI introduced a more general orientation distribution that captures anisotropic dispersion (different spreading in orthogonal directions) :cite:p:`Tariq2016BinghamNODDI` :cite:p:`Tariq2014DispersionAnisotropy`. This extension addresses NODDI’s inability to model crossing fiber populations in one voxel, by fitting two dispersion parameters instead of one. Such developments improved the model’s flexibility at the cost of additional complexity.
- Estimation Speed: A major practical advance was the AMICO algorithm (Daducci et al. 2015), which reformulated NODDI fitting as a linear inverse problem. AMICO achieves a 1000× speedup in fitting time with minimal loss of accuracy :cite:p:`Daducci2015AMICO`. This enabled large studies and clinical workflows to include NODDI analyses, cementing NODDI’s popularity. (Notably, AMICO does not alter NODDI’s metrics; it accelerates their computation.)
- Partial Volume Correction: A known issue is that CSF partial-volume can lead to underestimation of neurite density in voxels near ventricles or cortex. In 2021, Parker et al. introduced tissue-fraction–modulated ICVF and ODI, scaling NODDI metrics by the tissue signal fraction (1–ISOVF) :cite:p:`Zhao2021BrainDevelopment`. This adjustment was shown to remove artifactual group differences that were driven by differing CSF contamination rather than true tissue changes :cite:p:`Parker2021TissueWeightedNODDI`. Such modulated metrics are increasingly included in neuroimaging pipelines to improve the robustness of NODDI-derived measures.


##########################################################
NODDI Studies Across the Lifespan
##########################################################
- Early Development (Infancy): NODDI studies in infants show dramatic microstructural maturation within the first years of life. For example, neurite density (ICVF) in major tracts increases steeply from birth to age 3 :cite:p:`Jelescu2015WMTINODDI`, reflecting rapid axonal growth and myelination. This is accompanied by increasing restriction of diffusion in the extra-cellular space (consistent with growing fibers and tighter packing). Such changes underlie the large rises in FA observed in infancy, but NODDI pinpoints that it’s primarily due to increasing neurite density rather than changing fiber orientations.
- Childhood and Adolescence: Neurite density continues to rise through childhood and adolescence, though the rate slows with age. Multiple studies (e.g. Genc 2017, Mah 2017) found strong positive correlations between age and ICVF/NDI in children :cite:p:`Genc2017NDIAgeDevelopment`. By contrast, orientation dispersion (ODI) remains relatively stable during childhood – indicating that fiber organization (coherence) does not markedly increase after early childhood in most regions :cite:p:`Mah2017NODDIChildDevelopment`. The net effect is that white matter FA increases in youth are chiefly driven by increasing neurite density (more and thicker axons with more myelin), rather than fibers becoming straighter or more aligned. Children with higher NDI tend to have higher FA even if ODI is unchanged, meaning microstructural density is a key determinant of developmental differences :cite:p:`Mah2017NODDIChildDevelopment`.
- Late Adolescence to Early Adulthood: Neurite density in many tracts appears to plateau by the early 20s, reaching peak or near-peak values, while ODI might begin to creep upward. Chang et al. (2015) noted that NDI followed a logarithmic growth curve that leveled off in the 20s–30s, whereas ODI began an exponential upward trend in the 30s :cite:p:`Chang2015NODDIDataset`. This implies that during the transition to adulthood, continued incremental myelination is eventually counteracted by emerging microscopic disorganization (potentially reflecting early branching/pruning or cumulative minor damage), which foreshadows the patterns seen in later aging.
- Mid-Life and Healthy Aging: In mid-to-late adulthood, NODDI reveals progressive loss of neurite density and increasing fiber dispersion. Large-scale data from the UK Biobank (Cox et al. 2016) showed that older age is associated with lower ICVF (fewer or thinner axons, less myelin) and higher ODI (more dispersed or degraded fibers) across virtually all white matter tracts :cite:p:`Lawrence2021UKBiobankWhiteMatter`. Notably, these microstructural changes can be detected even in healthy adults with no disease – reflecting normative brain aging. Age-related ODI increases often accelerate in the later decades, consistent with accumulating structural disintegration (for example, due to myelin sheath loss and axonal loss leading to more “blurred” fiber orientations). Meanwhile, CSF fraction (ISOVF) also increases with age, indicating expanding extracellular space. Overall, NODDI suggests that the decline in FA in older adults is jointly caused by neurite loss and increased disorder in remaining fibers.
- Sex Differences: Lifespan studies have reported subtle sex differences in NODDI metrics. Men often show slightly higher neurite density and ODI in certain white matter pathways than women in mid-life :cite:p:`xLawrence2021UKBiobankWhiteMatter`, although the reasons (hormonal, developmental timing, etc.) remain under investigation. Some findings indicate men might experience steeper age-related declines in some tracts’ microstructure, but results are mixed. Generally, any sex effects are smaller than the dominant age trends.
- Clinical and Cognitive Relevance: The lifespan changes in NODDI metrics align with known windows of brain plasticity and decline. The steep NDI increase in childhood corresponds to learning and cognitive development, whereas rising ODI in late life correlates with cognitive slowing and increased white matter vulnerability. Importantly, NDI has been found to be a better predictor of chronological age than standard DTI measures in youth :cite:p:`Chang2015NODDIDataset` :cite:p:`Genc2017NDIAgeDevelopment`, and multivariate models including NODDI metrics can improve prediction of brain age or disease risk. Early studies in neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative conditions (e.g. autism, Alzheimer’s) also suggest NODDI-derived indices are sensitive to atypical maturation or accelerated aging, often more so than FA.


##########################################################
NODDI Methodological Warnings and Caveats
##########################################################
- Model Assumptions and Biases: NODDI relies on several fixed model assumptions – notably that all intra-axonal and extra-axonal water shares the same diffusion coefficient (typically d‖ = 1.7 µm²/ms) and that fibers in a voxel have a single average orientation dispersion (Watson distribution). In reality, these assumptions are often violated: gray matter neurites have slower diffusion, pathology can alter compartment diffusivities, and multiple fiber populations can exist. As a result, NODDI parameter estimates may be biased if these conditions aren’t met :cite:p:`Zhao2021BrainDevelopment`. For example, using the default d‖ in cortical gray matter can lead to overestimation of ICVF (since true diffusion is slower) – investigators have to adjust this value for different tissues or accept some bias :cite:p:`Zhao2021BrainDevelopment`. Simplifying assumptions are necessary to keep NODDI practical, but users should understand they introduce systematic errors in certain contexts.
- Degeneracy and Parameter Coupling: A fundamental challenge with multi-compartment models like NODDI is that different parameter combinations can produce very similar diffusion signals. There is a trade-off between neurite density and dispersion, for instance: a voxel with fewer, well-aligned axons can have a similar diffusion profile to one with more axons that are highly dispersed. This can lead to degenerate solutions where the fitting algorithm might converge on one of several “equivalent” parameter sets :cite:p:`Jelescu2017DiffusionModels`. In practice, it means NODDI outputs are not always unique – especially if data quality (SNR, number of diffusion directions, b-values) is limited. Careful protocol design (multi-shell, high angular resolution) and maybe mild fitting constraints can mitigate this, but it remains an inherent uncertainty. One implication is that small differences in fitting procedures or noise can noticeably impact the absolute NODDI values in a voxel (though group comparisons tend to be more robust).
- Noise and Data Requirements: NODDI fitting is more demanding than DTI – it typically requires multi-shell data and good SNR. Insufficient diffusion weightings (e.g. using only a single b-shell) can greatly reduce reliability of ICVF estimates. ODI is somewhat more stable and can even be approximated from single-shell data :cite:p:`Timmers2016DTINODDI`, but at the cost of assuming a fixed ICVF. High noise can also spuriously inflate ODI (as isotropic diffusion is misinterpreted) or produce patchy fits. Denoising and artifact correction (eddy currents, motion) are thus important preprocessing steps; failing to do so can lead to systematic distortions in NODDI maps (e.g. motion uncorrected data might yield artifactual high ODI in edges due to blurring). In short, NODDI is less forgiving of data quality issues than simpler models – rigorous preprocessing is recommended.
- Comparability and Reproducibility: As shown by test–retest studies, NODDI metrics are quite reproducible on the same scanner (variability on the order of a few percent) and comparable to DTI’s reproducibility :cite:p:`Andica2020ReproducibilityNODDI`. However, a major caveat is site/scanner differences. Small differences in gradient calibration, pulse sequence, or fitting software between MRI scanners can shift NODDI values systematically :cite:p:`Andica2020ReproducibilityNODDI`. For instance, one scanner might consistently report slightly higher ICVF than another for the same object. This means multi-center studies must either harmonize NODDI data (using phantoms or normalization algorithms) or avoid directly pooling raw NODDI values across sites. Even scanner upgrades at the same site could introduce bias. The community is aware of this, and efforts like traveling heads or harmonization techniques (e.g. ComBat) are being explored to ensure consistency of microstructure metrics across studies. Until then, caution is warranted when comparing NODDI outcomes from different datasets.
- Interpretational Specificity: While NODDI’s indices are more directly linked to microstructure than DTI’s, they are not one-to-one with histology. ICVF, for example, is often called “neurite density index,” but it doesn’t strictly equal axon count or volume fraction in a straightforward way – it’s influenced by dendrites in gray matter, by glial processes, and by whether axons are myelinated or not (myelin itself is invisible to diffusion MRI due to short T2). ODI is likewise a proxy for fiber orientation dispersion, but it can be increased by diverse scenarios (actual fanning of fibers, beading/swelling of axons, or mixture of fiber orientations). Moreover, pathology can confound these metrics: e.g., inflammation adds isotropic water which lowers ICVF and raises ISOVF, mimicking axonal loss. Thus, careful biological validation is needed. Studies correlating NODDI metrics with histological markers have shown good qualitative agreement (e.g. higher ICVF in myelin-rich areas :cite:p:`Timmers2016DTINODDI`), but users should avoid over-interpreting the absolute values. NODDI is best used to compare groups or conditions, rather than to obtain exact “neurite counts.”
- Use with Other Models: NODDI is one of several advanced diffusion models (others include diffusion kurtosis imaging, composite hindered and restricted model of diffusion – CHARMED, spherical mean technique, etc.). Each has its own assumptions. Comparative studies (like Timmers et al. 2016) underscore that NODDI doesn’t necessarily supersede simpler metrics in all aspects :cite:p:`Timmers2016DTINODDI`. For instance, FA remains a very sensitive marker for white matter differences, albeit nonspecific. An advisable strategy is to use NODDI alongside DTI: if FA is abnormal, NODDI can help attribute it to density or orientation effects :cite:p:`Timmers2016DTINODDI`. In some cases, combining multiple model outputs (DTI + NODDI + others) via machine learning can explain variance in data (like cognitive scores or disease status) better than any single model. Being aware of each model’s limitations allows researchers to draw more nuanced conclusions – for example, a region with unchanged FA but reduced NDI would indicate a very specific change that tensor metrics alone would miss.

**********
References
**********

.. bibliography::
   :style: unsrt
   :filter: cited